High in this video we're going to take a look at the boolean operators and we're just going to go jump
straight into the code and this is all based of course on the previous video on the lecture as a reminder.
Let's look at how often is defined in Python.
So it basically works this way if X is truthy Well if X is true in a regular or operation if X is true
then the result of true or anything is going to be true.
So the way it works in Python is that if X is truthy it just returns X doesn't return true it returns
X right.
X has a true truth value.
So it returns it however and if you look at a regular or operation if you have false or something else
then the result is really going to be whatever that something else is.
And in this case therefore if x is not truthy so otherwise it evaluates Y and returns it.
OK.
So that's how X or Y works.
So we can see that in action.
Let's take X to be truthful so we can take let's say a string.
Right.
So we can say string off and I'll do something really weird but we'll do that string off the list.
Now the string is truthy.
So it's going to return the string.
But if I were to do this right then the string is going to be falsie writes an empty string.
Faulty it has a length of 0.
And so when that happens it's actually going to evaluate and return Y which was the list one common
to.
Now there's other things that this is useful for.
For example you might have zero or.
Let's do one on one divided by zero.
And what I want to illustrate with this point is that this side doesn't get evaluated if X is truthy.
If this operand of the left operand is true it has a true value of true truth value then it will not
even evaluate this side.
And so it returns 1.
But if we were to do 0 0 1 divided by 0.
Well in this case X is false.
So therefore it will evaluate the right hand side and return it.
And of course that's going to cause a problem we have a division by zero error.
OK.
So this allows us to sometimes get rid of problems like that but the point here the real point I want
to make is that it is short circuiting right for precisely the reason we solve it.
Now there are some uses also to using the OR operator beyond as boolean expressions and if statements
we can use it for things like for example default values for variables.
Let's say that we have a set of streams as equals none.
OK so that's not a string that's a non object but we have this variable s one that we typically would
expect to have a string in but maybe it's coming from a database so it could be no.
Which would be none.
It could be just the empty string right.
Or it could actually contain some contents.
So we have these three strings and what we want is we want to make sure that those three strings always
contain a valid string.
Right and an empty string is valid as far as we're concerned but we certainly don't want none to be
in there right.
We want to put something else and maybe if the string is empty we want to put something else as well.
So we might do something like this.
S want equal as one or maybe we just say not available and then we'll do the same thing we've asked
to say as to who's equal to as true or not available and we'll do the same thing as three equals as
three or not available OK so now we have S1 S2 S3.
And let's see what they are right.
Well as you can see s one is now and a while yeah.
Because this was none right.
So that was falsie.
So it returned wiring as to whether the empty string.
So it's also falsie so it returned the right operand that y.
And as three however contain characters so that was truthy.
So just return to itself.
And so we have a b c.
So that's one way of basically assigning default values.
And you can do this with anything you can do this with the arm.
Let's say that you're dealing with lists and you don't want to have an empty list right.
You want to have a list that contains at least one element and maybe it has to default to 0.
Who knows what the use cases.
But there you go.
You won't end up with an empty list.
Same thing will work with you have none of that right.
So it works the same way.
So this is a great way just to get default values.
All right.
Next thing is to look at the end of x and y.
How is that calculated.
Well if you think back to the truth table for and if you take X and Y and X is false then false and
anything is still false so false and false is false false and true is also false.
So if X is false we don't need to even consider why we can't just return false right away.
So if X is false falsie return X right because it doesn't matter what wires.
But otherwise what do we need to do we'll.
Otherwise everything is now dependent on Y.
Right.
So if we have X is true and the result of true and false is going to be false and the result of true
and true is going to be true in other words it's only dependent on y.
So otherwise we're going to evaluate and returned y.
OK.
So that's the definition of x and y and hard works in Python.
It doesn't return the booleans.
It returns the objects based on their truth that is same thing as with or.
So for example let's say we take a false and something else.
So a false might be none.
For Lavely take none and zero while not zero because that's also false.
I want to do something that's not.
K and let's print it since that's not going to show us but it's the none right it returned none it returned
X because X was faulty and it would work the same way.
If you had let's say the empty list and let's say this list you.
Right.
So this is different from the OR right.
This returns the first one when it's false the all returns the second one when the first one is false.
So we have that.
So that can actually be used as well in certain cases.
I mean for example suppose that you have a calculation and you have a is equal to let's say to right.
And then we have B is equal to maybe 4.
And we want to look at a divided by V K and we have that that zero point five.
But suppose now that B is going to be 0 right.
Well if we have that we get a division by zero error.
And we don't want that.
We're going to we want to say that you know what if B is zero just returns 0.
Otherwise return a divided by B.
So that's what we want to do.
We want to return a divided by B in general but return to 0 when B is zero.
So we could do that using an if statement because say if B is equal to zero return 0 else return a divide
by the K and not return sorry we're not inside a function so we'll just print it.
So there we go.
So it prints 0.
Now let me report in a equals to B equals zero.
OK.
So that's where we get.
Now let's make be equal to 4.
OK.
So it's going to print 0.5.
So this is doing what we want.
We can certainly write it this way.
But another way of writing it would be to say the following.
Print what we're going to print what we want to print 0 if B is 0.
So we're going to say print B and divide it by B.
And let me again put in a and b here just so that we can see it in context.
And so we print 0.5 right.
B was 4.
That is truth.
So it's going to evaluate and return a divided by B which was four on the other hand if B is 0 then
we get to zero.
And so we avoided this division by zero error by doing it this way.
This was exactly equivalent to doing this.
All right.
So given that let's take a look now at a slightly different variants on this.
Let's say that we have a value that we're retrieving from a database a string.
So the same example that we had before.
And actually I'm just going to copy paste these three examples right here.
Now we saw how to assign a default value right to each one of those.
But now let's say it's not a default value that we want.
We want to check all we want to return the first character of the string.
If that first character exists otherwise we want to return something else maybe an empty string.
OK.
So using this you might say well I need to do is just do as 1 0 4 x 2 0 3 0.
Right these all three variants but of course that's going to cause a problem because none.
Well it doesn't have you know it's not indexable it doesn't have an element.
So that doesn't work.
So OK let's take that out.
And that still doesn't work well why this as is a string but it doesn't have characters so obviously
doesn't have a first element of index 0.
So that doesn't work.
And the last one Harvard does work but would like something that works in general no matter what the
variable S is going to be whether it's non empty string or an actual strength.
So one way to go about it might be to say well let's take s one and press 1 0.
So remember if S1 is truthy what is it going to do.
It's going to evaluate this side.
If s one is falsie it's just going to return itself right.
So let's go ahead and print this and we'll do that for all three and you'll see that we're almost there.
We almost have what we need.
So from that.
So you'll see the first one returns None.
The second one returns the empty string.
We don't see it but that's there.
And then the third one returns the first character of a.
So we were almost where we need to be.
The only thing is that we don't want to return None.
In this case we also want to return the empty string.
So what we can do here is change this.
And instead of just doing that we're going to aurat remember how we got default values while we're going
to or it with the empty string.
So if this evaluates to none that will be falsie.
And so we'll defaulted to this by using or.
And of course it actually works exactly the same way in all three cases.
So the second one is obvious because you know as to the empty string it's faulty so it returns a falsie
thing here which means that it's going to go ahead and then choose to return the empty string over here
as three will actually work exactly as we expect because S-3 is truthy.
So this expression here actually returns as 3 0 which is a single character which is also truthy.
So it's.
So the OR is going to return the left operand that's going to return that force characters.
So now if we run this we get exactly what we expect.
Empty string empty string and a.
Now of course what's interesting is that this doesn't just work of the empty string for the default
value.
You can do whatever you want.
Right.
You might do something like that in which case you'll get an A and A and A.
So it kind of works with any default values here.
So the last thing that we need to look at is the not operator.
Now the not operator isn't part of the Boolean class.
In fact if we look at health on the book Class we'll see that we see like and right we'll see or.
And we'll even see the x or in here.
But one thing that's notably missing is the not operator and the not operator doesn't work quite the
same way.
And and oh remember that.
And and all will actually return the objects that are the operands that will return one of the objects
depending on whether they're false or not.
Or truthfully or not to on which operator it is but not doesn't work this way.
Now the not regular booleans is pretty straightforward just negates true becomes false and not false
becomes true.
And these are true booleans.
Now the same thing works where objects now objects have a truth value.
So it will work kind of the same way.
If we look at bool let's say of a string that contains characters then that truth value is true.
ABC is truthy.
If we look at Boole are the empty string what we get false because that's false.
So if we do this we can do not rule AVC well not rule of ABC is going to return false and not all of
the empty string will return true.
But we don't have to put bhool in here.
We can just take it out so we can just say not ABC and Python will go in and actually you don't apply
the ball and look at the truth value of ABC and it will then do a not of that truth value and return
the bully.
So when we do not AVC we get false.
And in fact look at the type just to be sure we see that the type is indeed a ball.
So it's returning a ball.
Same thing with none.
Rule of none is false.
So we can say not none.
And we'll get true.
So that's all it does.
It really looks at the truth value of the operand and then returns not of that truth value.
So in this case we always get a boolean value back.
All right so that's it.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.